what's up guys so today i'm going to be
doing a video on why lectures don't work
initially i was kind of hesitant to make
this video because
a lot of people already hold the opinion
that lectures aren't a great educational
device
but actually i thought that this
question gives me a good opportunity to
talk about one of the most confusing
concepts
from the pleasure of learning article
that i discussed earlier
the concept of lung pee by understanding
the concept of lunch p
i think it gives you a really good sense
for why lectures and
universal delivery of education in
general simply can't work
so laundropy is a concept developed by
piotr wozniak
and i actually discussed philanthropy
briefly before in my video summary of
the pleasure of learning if you haven't
checked out that video already
i'll leave a link in the description i
strongly recommend it so after i
uploaded my
video summary of the pleasure of
learning article a couple of people
messaged me and they were kind of
confused because
they started reading the pleasure of
learning article and they scrolled down
and they immediately get hit by this
section on learn drive and entropy
and basically wozniak makes a bunch of
comparisons between
this concept in information theory
called shannon entropy
and how you can understand it in the
context of human learning
i think a lot of people start the
pleasure of learning article and they
get put off by the
part on shannon entropy and information
theory because it's just too confusing
and they sort of quit the article before
they get to the much more
intuitive tree metaphor which comes
pretty much right at the end of the
article
so i think that's a shame and so today
i'm going to try and break down the
concept of launchp
and explain it in a context that you're
probably familiar with the context of
lectures
so to begin with i think we can return
again to one of the concepts that i
described
in the pleasure of learning video
summary and that is the concept of
knowledge valuation
knowledge evaluation essentially
concerns the question of
what information are we attracted to in
that video i described how when a new
piece of information comes into the
brain
it undergoes neural processing during
which the brain
asks a series of questions to determine
how that piece of information should be
valued
the first question that the brain would
ask is is this new piece of information
surprising
surprising information tends to be
highly valued by the brain
the second question would be is this new
piece of information consistent
with my prior knowledge my theories
about the world
and my models of reality and finally the
brain would ask
is this new piece of information
coherent is it meaningful to me or not
so information that answers positively
to all of those questions
will be very highly valued by the brain
and information that is highly valued by
the brain
tends to be very easy to slot in to our
prior knowledge
so based on all of this one of the
questions you might be interested in
is can we measure how interesting a
piece of information is
in the 1940s a researcher called claude
shannon actually came up with a
mathematical theory
of how we might measure the information
contents of a message
in 1948 he published a paper titled a
mathematical theory of communication
in which he quantified the amount of
information contained within a message
based on the surprisal of that
information shannon entropy quantifies
the surprisal of a message
based on its probability that is to say
that if you read a message that has a
very low probability
and therefore is very surprising to you
you gain a lot of information
by the way if the name shannon entropy
is confusing you at all there's actually
a really interesting backstory behind it
claude shannon originally wasn't sure
what to call his new concept
so he called up his buddy jon von
neumann a very famous mathematician
and asked him for help von neumann said
the following
you should call it entropy for two
reasons in the first place your
uncertainty function has been used in
statistical mechanics under that name
so it already has a name and in the
second place and more important
nobody knows what entropy really is so
in a debate you will always have the
advantage
so if the references to shannon entropy
are confusing you
you don't need to feel bad because the
name was originally chosen kind of to
bamboozle you so let's look at a
concrete example of shannon entropy
english text treated as a series of
characters
has quite a low shine and entropy that's
because it's kind of predictable and not
very surprising
we can be fairly certain based on a
frequency analysis
of characters over a large corpus of
english language text
that the letter s is going to be more
likely to show up
than the letter z therefore when we're
showing that the last letter of the word
was s
the result isn't that surprising to us
we were able to predict it
and therefore the message doesn't
contain as much information
if it had been revealed to us that the
last lesson of the word was said
the result would be more surprising less
predictable
and therefore it would contain more
information a really important point to
bear in mind about shannon entropy
is that it's an objective measure that
means that the measurement of shannon
entropy is completely independent of the
observer
so whether you're an english native
speaker a french native speaker
or a cat the shannon entropy contained
within a message is going to be the same
for each of them
so there's a critical difference between
the way that shannon defined
information and how we understand
meaning and knowledge
information as shannon defines it is
objective
it doesn't depend on for example the
observer's prior knowledge
their theories about the world or their
models of reality this differs very
strongly with the concept of meaning
which requires interpretation and
interpretation
can be thought of as a kind of knowledge
comparison between the new information
coming in
and your prior knowledge the measure of
meaning must involve the brain of the
observer
because the interpretation process
carried out on raw information
to create meaning depends on prior
knowledge so that's the reason why
wozniak comes up with this new concept
of lunchaby
learntropy differs from shannon entropy
in that it contains this
knowledge comparison step where the new
information coming into the brain
is compared with the prior knowledge to
determine how it should be valued by the
brain
as i mentioned in the beginning of this
video one of the questions that the
brain
asks during neural processing is is this
new information surprising
but the surprisal in learntropy is
fundamentally different from the notion
of surprisal in
information theory in fact all three of
the measures that i mentioned
at the beginning of this video which the
brain uses to determine the value of a
piece of information
surprisal consistency and coherency are
all based on
a comparison with the prior knowledge of
the observer
so at this point i think we're finally
ready to get into what was supposed to
be the main topic for this video
why lectures don't work so here you can
see a representation of
three students watching a lecture you
can see that
in each case the information from the
lecture is flowing into
each student's mind but for each student
the reaction of the brain to that
information that's flowing in is very
different take for example the student
in the top left
you can see that their prior knowledge
represented by the
yellow network of nodes is not
sufficient to make the new information
flowing into the mind
relatable in any meaningful way in this
circumstance
we can say that the semantic distance
for that student to learn this new
information is too far
lacking the prerequisite knowledge to
understand a lecture is like listening
to a channel of pure static noise
or watching a tv programmer in a foreign
language you don't understand
the semantic distance between what you
already know and the new information
is too far you simply can't relate it to
anything already stored in your mind
attempts to decode the incoming
information by making it relatable to
what you already know
are destined to fail and this student is
likely to experience frustration
and boredom at not being able to
understand of course the problem is
compounded by the fact that the student
can't simply hit pause
and give themselves time to build up
their prior knowledge which is required
to understand the lecture
instead they have to just sit there and
enjoy the displeasure and frustration of
not understanding what's being taught to
them
so based on these factors we can say
that the learner p or the attractiveness
of the lecture to that student
is very low now let's take a look at the
student in the bottom left
for this student the information flowing
from the lecture into their mind
is consistent and coherent with their
prior knowledge the new information
seems to just slot in effortlessly
into what they already know the new
information combined with their prior
knowledge
could generate a new creative
association that could cause them to
punch the air and scream eureka
so for this student the new information
flowing into the mind is perfectly
suited
to their prior knowledge rather than
this lecture being a boring grind like
it was for the first student
this is going to be a golden nugget
filled adventure full of new
interesting surprises because the
lecture is very interesting and has the
potential to generate new creative
insights for the student
we can say that the learn trippy is very
high finally let's take a look at the
last student in the top right
in this case you can see that in their
prior knowledge they've already
crystallized this golden nugget
filled with all of the interesting
insights that are coming from the
lecture
perhaps they've watched the lecture
before or they've learned this
information from other sources
in this case the new information flowing
into their mind
may be consistent and coherent but it
doesn't have this surprisable factor
there's nothing in the new information
that generates new associations or
makes them see the world in a different
light so while they can perfectly
understand what's being taught to them
they might be extremely bored and
frustrated and feel like they're wasting
their time
for this student the lecture has a low
attractiveness and therefore a low
launch p
notice how for each student while the
shannon entropy
the objective measure of information
developed by claude shannon
would be the same the lunch b for each
student would be very different
and would depend strongly on their prior
knowledge
so given the fine-grained nature of the
comparison between new information
and prior knowledge that underlies how
attracted we are
to new information any attempt to
deliver
one source of information to a group of
different students each
with a different level of prior
knowledge is going to be futile
even students who would appear to have
roughly the same prior knowledge
based on their prior attendance at some
courses leading up to this lecture
could in actuality have very different
prior knowledge
actually stored in their mind this could
be due to the fact that some students
are learning outside of those courses
and assimilating
different knowledge into their prior
knowledge than some of the other
students in the class
but discrepancies in prior knowledge
could also be caused by the natural
decay of memories over time which would
occur at different rates for each
student
based on how well that material was
assimilated into their prior knowledge
initially
and how stable those memories remained
over time
the best option therefore for a lecture
design for
a college class for example of 300
students
is to design the information of the
lecture
to be compatible with the average prior
knowledge of all of those students
but in doing so you manufacture a stale
homogenous blob of information
rather than something that can really
appeal to people's niche
interests and what they really care
about and for that reason compulsory
lectures
and universal delivery of education as a
whole
are doomed to be mediocre and
uninteresting
okay guys so that's it for this video
today i really hope you enjoyed it
please do let me know in the comments if
this is the kind of video you want me to
make
or if you have any other suggestions
thanks again and i'll see you in the
next video